---
layout: post
title: "Compiler Compilers: Bison, part 1"
description: "Getting started with Bison"
category: 
tags: [bison, parser, lexer, yacc, grammar]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

## Why? ##

A few months ago I joined <a href="http://macournoyer.com/">Marc-André
Cournoyer</a>'s <a href="http://www.greatcodeclub.com/">Great Code Club</a>.
I will right my own blog post about this club, but let me say that t $30, its
well worth it to expand my programming life past Saas sites, exercism and Euler
projects.
Where was I? 
The second project from the Great Code Club is a transpiler, creating a css
parser from scratch. Far out right? Well I bobbled through M-A's use of <a
href="http://zaach.github.io/jison/">Jison</a>. At this stage of my career, I
can pick up this stuff pretty fast. But for me its always: can I get a deeper
understanding? Can I learn more? And in the world of computers, the answer is
always an emphatic __YES!!!!__.

Javascript and Go are the languages I am learning now. Ruby is the language I am
currently most fluent in. I looked at <a
href="https://github.com/tenderlove/racc">RACC</a> and <a
href="https://github.com/tenderlove/rexical">Rexical</a>, both developed by
Tenderlove. The documentation on these tools is parse. I couldn't find any good
information on them.

So, I says: "looks like its time to go back to grand-daddy C." I begin looking at
<a href="http://www.gnu.org/software/bison/">Bison</a> (gnu's YACC). 
There is some documentation. Its going to be an interesting journey.

In the next series of posts, I hope to illuminate you to the world of compiler
compilers, grammars, lexers, and parsers.

We will start this adventure looking a Bison and Flex, move on to RACC and
Rexical, then onto Jison and Jisonlex, and possibly look at Go's YACC tools.

Grab your helmet, its going to be a bumpy ride.

This information is grabbed from the painful <a
href="http://dinosaur.compilertools.net/bison/">Bison docs<a/>.

## Learn Me Some Bison! ##

### Terms ###

Token - A terminal input
Grouping - A non-terminal input of groupings and/or tokens

A single character is always a token, because it cannot be broken down further.

### Lexers, Grammars, Parsers ###

When you get into grammars you can easily find yourself going down the rabbit
hole on wikipedia. Lets keep it simple, with an analogy like Coinstar, the
automated coin counting machine:

_(the input is the 1000s of coins you found in your couch, as well as lent,
pebbles and small pieces of plastic)_

__Lexical analysis (lexers) looks through the mess that is dumped into the
machine and identifies coinage of a certain criteria: U.S. minted pennies,
nickels, dimes and quarters. Everything else is discarded.__

__Grammars instruct how to total the proper coinage. Perhaps the coins are first
siloed into individual denomination collections. Those collections are then
subtotaled based on proper coin value. Finally the total of the subtotals is
calcualted and printed to a redemption voucher to take to the store manager for
cash monies__.

__Parsers, the are the automated output of running a compiler compiler using the
lexical declaractions and grammar, is the magic of the machine: I dump in
coinage, out pops a voucher__

The takeaway here is that the "parser" is the output of the process. The parser
is the code that can be inserted in any of our programs. The parser will be
shipped along with any final product.

To take it home lets look at a contrived example:

Lexical declarations:

| Symbol | What to do with it | 
|--------|--------------------|
| digit  | keep it, as token |
| + (plus sign) | keep it |
| other  | discard it |

Grammar: 

| Pattern | What to do with it | 
|---------|--------------------|
| "token"   | return it
| "token + token" | return first plus second |

Parser Generated: 

{% highlight c %}
Parser.parse("1")           // returns 1
Parser.parse("1 + 2")       // returns 3
Parser.parse("- A 1 + 2")   // discards - A returns 3
{% endhighlight %}

### Bison ###

The layout of the Bison grammar file is:

{% highlight c %}
%{
C declarations
%}

Bison declarations

%%
Grammar rules
%%
Additional C code
{% endhighlight %}

A lexer like flex would replace the "Bison declaration" section.


